Three nights halting in their journey with their steeds fatigued and spent, 
Envoys from Mithila’s monarch to Ayodhya’s city went, 
And by royal mandate bidden stepped within the palace hall, 
Where the ancient Dasa-ratha sat with peers and courtiers all, 
And with greetings and obeisance spake their message calm and bold,
Softly fell their gentle accents as their happy tale they told.
“Greetings to thee, mighty monarch, greetings to each priest and peer, 
Wishes for thy health and safety from Videha’s king we bear, 
Janak monarch of Videha for thy happy life hath prayed, 
And by Viswa-mitra’s bidding words of gladsome message said:
‘Known on earth my plighted promise, spoke by heralds near and far, –
He shall win my peerless Sita who shall bend my bow of war, –
Monarchs came and princely suitors, chiefs and warriors known to fame, 
Baffled in their fruitless effort left Mithila in their shame, 
Rama came with gallant Lakshman by their proud preceptor led, 
Bent and broke the mighty weapon, he the beauteous bride shall wed!
Rama strained the weapon stoutly till it snapped and broke in twain, 
In the concourse of the monarchs, in the throng of arméd men, 
Rama wins the peerless princess by the righteous will of Heaven, 
I redeem my plighted promise – be thy kind permission given!
 
[8] Monarch of Kosala’s country! with each lord and peer and priest, 
Welcome to Mithila’s city, welcome to Videha’s feast, 
Joy thee in thy Rama’s triumph, joy thee with a father’s pride, 
Let each prince of proud Kosala win a fair Videha-bride!’
These by Viswa-mitra’s bidding are the words our monarch said, 
This by Sata-nanda’s counsel is the quest that he hath made.”
Joyful was Kosala’s monarch, spake to chieftains in the hall, 
Vama-deva and Vasishtha and to priests and Brahmans all:
“Priests and peers! in far Mithila, so these friendly envoys tell, 
Righteous Rama, gallant Lakshman, in the royal palace dwell, 
And our brother of Videha prizes Rama’s warlike pride, 
To each prince of proud Kosala yields a fair Videha-bride, 
If it please ye, priests and chieftains, speed we to Mithila fair, 
World-renowned is Janak’s virtue, Heaven-inspired his learning rare!”
Spake each peer and holy Brahman: “Dasa-ratha’s will be done!
Spake the king unto the envoys: “Part we with the rising sun!”
Honoured with a regal honour, welcomed to a rich repast, 
Gifted envoys from Mithila day and night in gladness passed!