On Ayodhya’s tower and turret now the golden morning woke, 
Dasa-ratha girt by courtiers thus to wise Sumantra spoke:
“Bid the keepers of my treasure with their waggons lead the way, 
Ride in front with royal riches, gold and gems in bright array, 

[9] Bid my warriors skilled in duty lead the four-fold ranks of war, 
Elephants and noble chargers, serried foot and battle-car, 
Bid my faithful chariot-driver harness quick each car of state, 
With the fleetest of my coursers, and upon my orders wait.
Vama-deva and Vasishtha versed in Veda’s ancient lore, 
Kasyapa and good Jabali sprung from holy saints of yore, 
Markandeya in his glory, Katyayana in his pride, 
Let each priest and proud preceptor with Kosala’s monarch ride, 
Harness to my royal chariot strong and stately steeds of war,
For the envoys speed my journey and the way is long and far.”
With each priest and proud retainer Dasa-ratha led the way,
Glittering ranks of forces followed in their four-fold dread array, 
Four days on the way they journeyed till they reached Videha’s land, 
Janak with a courteous welcome came to greet the royal band.
Joyously Videha’s monarch greeted every priest and peer, 
Greeted ancient Dasa-ratha in his accents soft and clear:
“Hast thou come, my royal brother, on my house to yield thy grace, 
Hast thou made a peaceful journey, pride of Raghu’s royal race?
Welcome! for Mithila’s people seek my royal guest to greet, 
Welcome! for thy sons of valour long their loving sire to meet,
Welcome too the priest Vasishtha versed in Veda’s ancient lore, 
Welcome every righteous rishi sprung from holy saints of yore!
And my evil fates are vanquished and my race is sanctified,
With the warlike race of Raghu thus in loving bonds allied, 
Sacrifice and rites auspicious we ordain with rising sun, 
Ere the evening’s darkness closes, happy nuptials shall be done!”
Thus in kind and courteous accents Janak spake his purpose high, 
And his royal love responding, Dasa-ratha made reply:

[10] “Gift betokens giver’s bounty, – so our ancient sages sing, –
And thy righteous fame and virtue grace thy gift, Videha’s king!
World-renowned is Janak’s bounty, Heaven-inspired his holy grace,
And we take his boon and blessing as an honour to our race!”
Royal grace and kingly greetings marked the ancient monarch’s word, 
Janak with a grateful pleasure Dasa-ratha’s answer heard, 
And the Brahmans and preceptors joyously the midnight spent, 
And in converse pure and pleasant and in sacred sweet content.
Righteous Rama gallant Lakshman piously their father greet,
Duly make their deep obeisance, humbly touch his royal feet, 
And the night is filled with gladness for the king revered and old,
Honoured by the saintly Janak, greeted by his children bold, 
On Mithila’s tower and turret stars their silent vigils keep, 
When each sacred rite completed, Janak seeks his nightly sleep