With his wedded sons and daughters and his guard in bright array,
To the famed and fair Ayodhya, Dasa-ratha held his way, 
And they reached the ancient city decked with banners bright and brave, 
And the voice of drum and trumpet hailed the home-returning brave,
Fragrant blossoms strewed the pathway, song of welcome filled the air, 
Joyous men and merry women issued forth in garments fair 
And they lifted up their faces and they waved their hands on high, 
And they raised the voice of welcome as their righteous king drew nigh.
Greeted by his loving subjects, welcomed by his priests of fame, 
Dasa-ratha with the princes to his happy city came, 
With the brides and stately princes in the town he held his way, 
Entered slow his lofty palace bright as peak of Himalay.
Queen Kausalya blessed with virtue, Queen Kaikeyi in her pride,
Queen Sumitra sweetly loving, greeted every happy bride,

[15] Soft-eyed Sita noble-destined, Urmila of spotless fame, 
Mandavi and Sruta-kirti to their loving mothers came.
Decked in silk and queenly garments they performed each pious rite, 
Brought their blessings on the household, bowed to Gods of holy might, 
Bowed to all the honoured elders, blest the children with their love, 
And with soft and sweet endearment by their loving consorts moved.
Happy were the wedded princes peerless in their warlike might,
And they dwelt in stately mansions like KUVERA’s mansions bright, 
Loving wife and troops of kinsmen, wealth and glory on them wait,
Filial love and fond affection sanctify their happy fate.
Once when on the palace chambers bright the golden morning woke, 
To his son the gentle Bharat, thus the ancient monarch spoke:
“Know, my son, the prince Kaikeya, Yudhajit of warlike fame,
Queen Kaikeyi’s honoured brother, from his distant regions came, 
He hath come to take thee, Bharat, to Kaikeya’s monarch bold, 
Go and stay with them a season, greet thy grandsire loved of old.”
Bharat heard with filial duty and he hastened to obey, 
Took with him the young Satrughna in his grandsire’s home to stay, 
And from Rama and from Lakshman parted they with many a tear, 
From their young and gentle consorts, from their parents ever dear, 
And Kaikeya with the princes, with his guards and troopers gay, 
To his father’s western regions gladsome held his onward way.
Rama with a pious duty, – favoured by the Gods above, –
Tended still his ancient father with a never-faltering love,
In his father’s sacred mandate still his noblest Duty saw, 
In the weal of subject nations recognised his foremost Law!
And he pleased his happy mother with a fond and filial care, 
And his elders and his kinsmen with devotion soft and fair, 
[16] Brahmans blessed the righteous Rama for his faith in gods above, 
People in the town and hamlet blessed him with their loyal love!
With a woman’s whole affection fond and trusting Sita loved, 
And within her faithful bosom loving Rama lived and moved, 
And he loved her, for their parents chose her as his faithful wife, 
Loved her for her peerless beauty, for her true and trustful life, 
Loved and dwelt within her bosom though he wore a form apart, 
Rama in a sweet communion lived in Sita’s loving heart!
Days of joy and months of gladness o’er the gentle Sita flew, 
As she like the QUEEN OF BEAUTY brighter in her graces grew, 
And as VISHNU with his consort dwells in skies, alone, apart,
Rama in a sweet communion lived in Sita’s loving heart!
